---
title: "How to Write and Publish?"
date: 2023-05-24
published: true
excerpt: "How to write and publish a scientific paper? What are the hidden rules?"

toc: true
toc_sticky: true
---

Writing and publishing a scientific paper is much more complicated than writing a paper read by your professors. There're specific formats and high standards to meet. 

Before you can celebrate having a paper published, you need a great **manuscript**, **submit** it for review (to a conference and/or journal), **wait** patiently for decisions from editors/reviewers, **make revisions** if needed (usually needed!), maybe **re-submit**, and finally get that exciting news of **acceptance and publication**.

## Hidden Rules

But here’s a thing: there're many **hidden rules and norms that vary by discipline**. It’s always important to know the requirements and conventions in your field, like the length of papers, who should be included as authors and in which order, how long the review process takes, which conferences/journals to target, and so on. 

**Students and early career professionals often learn from their tutors, mentors, and faculty advisors, and reading publications in your field, particularly papers in your target journal(s) helps too.**

## Authorship

Authorship can be tricky, not as imagined, especially for people in the early stages of their careers.

**Not everyone who contributes will be listed as an author.** Some with smaller contributions are only thanked in the acknowledgments. There might also be strict limits on the number of authors, leading to tough decisions. 

**And ordering authors can be challenging and sometimes leads to unintended effects.** For instance, authors are typically listed alphabetically in the field of Economics. People with last names like *Aaron* have advantages over people like me with last names like *Zhao*.

## Review Process

**Reviews can take weeks, months, or even years.** There can be multiple rounds of review, and many editors and reviewers are involved. 

After a manuscript is submitted, it's not directly sent to reviewers. First, administrative editors will check for compliance with submission requirements. Then, the manuscript goes to Editor-in-Chief for a decision, which is called ***“desk reject”***. In fact, many manuscripts get desk rejected right away. 

According to <a href="https://profiles.stanford.edu/sherrirose">**Prof. Sherri Rose**</a>, Professor of Health Policy at Stanford and Co-Editor-in-Chief of the journal *Biostatistics*, about **60%** of the manuscripts are desk rejected! It does speed up the waiting time for authors though. Want more insider info? Check out <a href="https://decodingacademia.org/">HRP 255</a>, a course taught by Prof. Rose!

